Determinants of Disparities in Covid-19 Job Losses

The First Weeks of the Coronavirus Crisis: Who Got Hit, When and Why? Evidence from Norway

Does Biology Drive Child Penalties? Evidence from Biological and Adoptive Families

Is the Cure Worse than the Problem Itself? Immediate Labor Market Effects of COVID-19 Case Rates and School Closures in the U.S.

An Economic Approach to Regulating Algorithms

Social Security Wealth, Inequality, and Lifecycle Saving

Education and Innovation: The Long Shadow of the Cultural Revolution

The Boll Weevil’s Impact on Racial Income Gaps in the Early Twentieth Century

Inequality of Fear and Self-Quarantine: Is There a Trade-off between GDP and Public Health?

Office Visits Preventing Emergency Room Visits: Evidence From the Flint Water Switch

Employer Policies and the Immigrant-Native Earnings Gap

A New Method for Estimating Teacher Value-Added

Dropouts Need Not Apply? The Minimum Wage and Skill Upgrading

Do Differences in School Quality Generate Heterogeneity in the Causal Returns to Education?

Which Workers Bear the Burden of Social Distancing?

Immigration, Innovation, and Growth

Team Players: How Social Skills Improve Group Performance

Does Economics Make You Sexist?

Asian American Discrimination in Harvard Admissions

Labor Demand in the time of COVID-19: Evidence from vacancy postings and UI claims

Information and the Persistence of the Gender Wage Gap: Early Evidence from California's Salary History Ban

Does the US Tax Code Favor Automation?

It Takes a Village: The Economics of Parenting with Neighborhood and Peer Effects

Demographic Perspectives on Mortality of Covid-19 and Other Epidemics

Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups

Managing Intelligence: Skilled Experts and AI in Markets for Complex Products

Evidence on Job Search Models from a Survey of Unemployed Workers in Germany

Beyond Reading, Writing, and Arithmetic: The Role of Teachers and Schools in Reporting Child Maltreatment

Can the Unemployed Borrow? Implications for Public Insurance

Lock-downs, Loneliness and Life Satisfaction

Labor Markets During the COVID-19 Crisis: A Preliminary View

No Line Left Behind: Assortative Matching Inside the Firm

Measuring Racial Discrimination in Bail Decisions

Ageing-Driven Migration and Redistribution: Comparing Policy Regimes

The Wealth Decumulation Behavior of the Retired Elderly in Italy: The Importance of Bequest Motives and Precautionary Saving

Rising Burdens of Proofs and The Grand Bargain of Workers’ Compensation Laws

The Impact of Benefit Generosity on Workers’ Compensation Claims: Evidence and Implications

Beyond Cobb-Douglas: Flexibly Estimating Matching Functions with Unobserved Matching Efficiency

Understanding “Wage Theft”: Evasion and Avoidance Responses to Minimum Wage Increases

The Labor Market Returns to Advanced Degrees

Is Fish Brain Food or Brain Poison? Sea Surface Temperature, Methyl-mercury and Child Cognitive Development

Labor Market Polarization and the Great Divergence: Theory and Evidence

Demographic Determinants of Testing Incidence and COVID-19 Infections in New York City Neighborhoods

How Many Jobs Can be Done at Home?

The Impact of COVID-19 on Gender Equality

Quitting in Protest: Presidential Policymaking and Civil Service Response

The Murder-Suicide of the Rentier: Population Aging and the Risk Premium

The Rise of American Minimum Wages, 1912-1968

Discrimination, Migration, and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from World War I

Changes in Assortative Matching and Inequality in Income: Evidence for the UK

Changes in Assortative Matching: Theory and Evidence for the US

Culture and Gender Allocation of Tasks: Source Country Characteristics and the Division of Non-market Work among US Immigrants

The Brazilian Bombshell? The Long-Term Impact of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic the South American Way

The Economic Impact of a High National Minimum Wage: Evidence from the 1966 Fair Labor Standards Act

What Explains the Gender Gap in Wealth? Evidence from Administrative Data

Pareto-Improving Carbon-Risk Taxation